1. Introduction and Building Rapport

Excellent: The doctor introduces themselves: They state their name, their role, set an agenda (e.g. "I will use this time to gather information about you, When we are finished I will talk with Dr. ...), elicits all of patient's concerns (Ask if patient has other concerns besides chief complaint),  shows interest in the patient (Use words that show concern), elicits patient's expectations about illness/treatment, and assesses patient's understanding of the problem
Good: The doctor introduces themselves and their role but does not set an agenda, elicit all the patient’s concerns, show interest in the patient, elicit the patient’s expectations about illness/treatment, or assess the patient’s understanding of the problem.
Needs Improvement: The doctor fails to introduce themselves or their role adequately and does not build rapport with the patient.

2. Open-Ended Inquiry

Excellent: The doctor uses open-ended questions effectively, allowing the patient to describe their symptoms and concerns.
Good: The doctor uses some open-ended questions but may interrupt the patient or lead them in a specific direction.
Needs Improvement: The doctor relies heavily on close-ended questions and fails to let the patient express their concerns fully.

3. Focused Inquiry and Probing Questions

Excellent: The doctor asks focused and probing questions to gather important information about the patient, namely the history associated with their chief complaint, their past medical history, their family history, their social history, their habits history (use of tobacco, alcohol, and recreational drugs), their medications, and their allergies.
Good: The doctor asks some focused questions but does not gather all the information on the patient’s history associated with their chief complaint, their past medical history, their family history, their social history, their habits history (use of tobacco, alcohol, and recreational drugs), their medications, and their allergies.
Needs Improvement: The doctor fails to ask focused or probing questions to get necessary details on the patient’s history associated with their chief complaint, their past medical history, their family history, their social history, their habits history (use of tobacco, alcohol, and recreational drugs), their medications, and their allergies.

4. Differential Diagnosis Development

Excellent: The doctor demonstrates an ability to develop a clear and well-structured differential diagnosis, based on the information obtained.
Good: The doctor develops a differential diagnosis but may lack depth or overlook some possibilities.
Needs Improvement: The doctor struggles to develop a coherent differential diagnosis.

5. Communication Skills and Professionalism

Excellent: The doctor communicates clearly and professionally, maintaining empathy and confidentiality.
Good: The doctor communicates adequately but may lack professionalism or empathy in certain areas.
Needs Improvement: The doctor struggles with clear communication and demonstrates lapses in professionalism or empathy.

6.  Motivation/Counseling:
Excellent: The doctor engages in motivational interviewing when necessary, reflecting the patient’s feelings back to them, counseling the patient, and conveying respect for the patient and their problem.
Good: The doctor engages in motivational interviewing when necessary, but does not spend a lot of time trying to understand the patient’s perspective or counseling the patient.
Needs Improvement: The doctor fails to engage in motivational interviewing when necessary or does not respect the patient and their problem.